---
layout: post
title: "Google Code Jam (1B)"
---

Purpose of this post is to summarize mistakes I made and take lessons for next time.

Qualification round was not easy, however limits were quite benevolent and thus I qualified for the next round. First (1A) attempt was not for my timezone, therefore I joined 1B.

===== Problem A. Counter Culture =====

https://code.google.com/codejam/contest/8224486/dashboard

  * First idea was BFS in graph where nodes are numbers and there are either direct (+1) or reverse (digits reverse) edges.
  * I implemented and debugged the BFS (took some time).
  * Realized it's not very efficient (for input numbers > 10000).
  * Then thought about it once again and it seemed to me that greedy approach is valid.
  * I drafted the algo, tested in on test input until I got correct results.
  * Then I felt confident enough to try the small dataset, there were some errors though...
  * Fortunately, I kept the original BFS version that was correct (slow though) and I was able to find some discriminative testcases for the versions and could debug the latter version and attempt to submit both small and large input (the algo was quite fast).
  * This took me 2 hours in total.

===== Problem B. Noisy Neighbors =====

https://code.google.com/codejam/contest/8224486/dashboard#s=p1

  * **30 minutes remaining**
    * Small input was apparently suitable for brute-force solution, so I kept that on mind and decided to think about better solution.
  * **20 minutes remaining**
    * OK, I didn't figure out anything better so at least naïve brute-force could be sufficient.
    * I started implementing, from scratch (input parsing, header includes, ...)
  * **4 minutes remaining**
    * I got compilable, runnable version, however it fails on the test data.
    * When looking for mistakes I found some conditions that I forgot to implement (though having them on mind previously)
  * **30 seconds remaining**
    * I'm desperate, the solution is so simple and decomposed there cannot be any errors.
    * It still gives wrong results, time is out, I'm angry.
  * **after contest**
    * Finally I found the mistakes:
      * Off-by-one error that was caused by my insecurity about some boundaries and I thought making them larger (+1) wouldn't change the solution. Obviously it did and without that +1 it was correct.
      * I was using ''sizeof'' as if it returned size in bits instead of bytes.

===== Lessons learned =====

  * Prepare some templates with boilerplate code (includes, usings, ''main'') -- it takes time and interrupts attention.
  * Better time management -- 20 minutes is not enought to write and debug even simple solution (because of the stress).
  * Stop refining solution that I know is inefficient and think about it once more (or have some pause, little distraction to refresh mind).
  * What the heck was efficient solution for the Noisy Neighbors?
    * Simple as breeze: chessboard pattern
      * if ''N'' < ''R*C / 2'', I can distribute tenants without adjacency (chessboard pattern)
      * any neighbor that is more than the half goes to some field of the chessboard and it's always 4 neighbors (or less on building borders)
    * You must think better, Michal...

==== Coding ====

  * handy macros for debug prints
  * rectangular grid via "move vectors"
  * use global variables when it makes code more terse
  * typedefs for common vectors (int, long long), pairs(?)
  * macros for loops

