---
layout: post
title: Midi Lidi (concert)
tags: culture music
---

I decided to support the band Midi Lidi I randomly came across on the internets
by visiting their concert.
It was also the first time I visited the Meet Factory -- a perceived Mecca of
Prague artists and intellectuals.


## Likes

- Concert hall was non-smoking.
- Nice gesture when they baptised a [link to uloz.to][ulozto] instead of
  physical medium.
- Parody of "Co je nejkrásnější" nationalist song.

[ulozto]: https://uloz.to/!MDVGGpXfV/midi-lidi-give-masterpiece-a-chance-2016-rar

## Dislikes

- Despite concert was advertised to start at 20:30, Midi Lidi were scheduled
  only at 22:15 (there were other musicians performing before them).
  - There was also an exhibition, which I didn't grasp. I liked the quote "I'll
    send the army of sociologists!" though.
- However, they still started almost at 23:00 (on Monday(!), cf. [Mucha]({% post_url 2016-09-11-mucha %})).
- Sound quality was very poor.
  - Very loud, my ears were overdriven into non-linear mode.
  - Low ratio of vocals and instruments.
- People density was (locally) very high.

## The band

- Was it playback or did they perform live?
- Signer/dancer, women dancer/lysophonist (clarinetist), flegmatic drummer,
  guitarist.

## Audience

- Most people around my age, skewed to the olders.
- People without collars were dancing (I had a polo shirt so I didn't dance :-).
  - Music and Midi Lidi supported the dance.
- A guy decided to "swim" on people's hands. I was afraid he'd get above me, it
  happened and he fell down :-p
