---
layout: post
title: FOSDEM 2016
tags: ['travel', 'open source']
---

[The first part](#day0) dedcribes traveller's experience in Bruxelles.
Then I wrote few points for each lecture I visited on [Saturday](#day1)
and [Sunday](#2), most importantly there are some **tocheck** marks for topics
that are at least worth googling.


## <a id="day0"/> Day 0

Assorted impressions and thoughts from my first day in Belgium (ever):

### Bilingual environment -- French/<del>German</del>Dutch

  * Until this comparison I thought that English was the most "Germanic"
    language I knew. Seeing the labels side by side, I realized how much
    English is affected by French and it is much less a representative of the
    Germanic language group than German.
  * Despite bilingual, most people spoke French.

### Belgian style
  * When I was walking around the city, it somehow appeared to me typically
    Belgian (i.e. my fantasies about Belgium).
    * Dark facades or even dusty bricks.
    * Shops and services use cursive/curly fonts in their signs.
    * Narrow streets and narrow houses (e.g. width of only a single room).
  * Jugendstil, not medieval?

### Geography
  * Division to uptown and downtown is literal.
  * I didn't see a river, must be a small one.

### French impact
  * No garbage containers (in the main streets) -- people just piled boxes or
    bags with garbage in front of their shops, restaurants, etc.

### Dutch impact
  * Although hilly and winter (well, ocean climate winter), still there were
    many people cycling (as transport, not sport).

### Public transport
  * Neatly reconstructed interiors of trams (wood cover, pleasant sounds -- no
    buzzer).
  * Underground carriage looked older and were without an outer paint, just
    aluminium.
  * Interior of the stations was rather ugly (functionalism?).
  * All ticket machines (in the center at least) accepted payment cards.
  * No checks in trains, automatic gates that scan a ticket.
  
### People

  * Soldiers guarding underground/important buildings (hopefully a temporary
    measure).
  * Cosmopolitan city:
    * Poor (beggars), rich (nicely clothed) of all races/descents (Europeans,
      Asians, Africans, Arabs).
    * Party integrated (many kebab or halal shops), however, when I got lost I
      observed some partitioning to Arab and non-Arab quarters.

### Sites
  * Maneken Pis is smaller than I expected, still not sure I didn't accidentally
    saw a fake one.
  * In the historical center, there are many pubs, open gardens even in
    January. (They seemed stylish, although there were some differences between
    center and more distant locations.)
  * I saw the Atomium from the train and my my brain is now copyrighted :-)

### FOSDEM beer-event
  * Traditional visit of the Delirium Café -- high througput (cl\|p)ub -- tens
    of taps, many fasses and pipings.
  * FOSDEM visitors almost DDoS'd it (no one was denied a beer :-) -- you
    couldn't move inside and tens (maybe few hundreds) people were overflowing
    to neighboring streets.


## <a id="day1"/> Day 1

### systemd and Where We Want to Take the Basic Linux Userspace in 2016
  - unified cgroups hierarchy
  - systemd-resolved
    - DNSSEC
      - solves nothing, can break anything
  - unjustifiable attention?
  - OT: Gigantic lecture hall, my estimate is 1500 seats, I've never been in
    such a big room before. I wonder how could the ceiling not collapse with no
    column support in the room.

### What's coming up in containers?
  - cgroup namespaces
  - setting capabilities from within containers
  - usage of loopfs inside containers
  - didn't catch the beginning so just watched the demos
    - Incidentally, I learnt about history expansion in Bash (via `!` character).

### Docker for developers
  - understanding containers as interconnectable components
    - testing network topologies
  - assorted use cases for application developers
    - sharing files into container via bind mounts
    - keeping a container with clean (fresh) database for carefree experimenting
    - container pool to shorten testing time
    - application with mock API inside a container?

### Filesystem defragmentation strategies
  - reasons for defragmentation
    - almost full FS
    - files with holes
    - optimization of reading throughput (e.g. for boot sequence)
      - does it apply to (wear-levelled) SSDs too?
    - greater block size of thin-provisioned backing files of VMs
      - the main motivation: greater block size of the image negatively affects
	storage capacity efficiency
  - the guy patched e2fsprogs
    - some heuristics for relocation
      - readonly/old files, small files

### Scaling with Kubernetes, Automatically!
  - container orchestrator at large scale wrt resources
    - controlled via REST API (even support for (reverse) notifications)
  - case study: Infinispan (distributed fault-tolerant in-memory cache
    (key-value))
    - adding/removing nodes from Infinispan system
    - quite useless visualization app (you just see individual nodes and items
      stored in them), however very impressive for presentation

### Leveraging Docker in Automotive projects based on AGL/GENIVI
  - they are developing for a board with Yocto/Poky distro
    - two packages (Docker images)
      - Board Support Package (BSP) -- to flash to the board
      - complementary SDK package for development
  - reduces cost and time-to-market, continuous integration
  - emphasis on repeatable builds
    - LTS versions of the embedded SW
    - idea: can't it make OBS environment setup faster?
      - it's basically chroot with cached packages already
    - curiosity: 40 yrs old nuclear pwplants in France, people keep such old
      computers to be able to rebuild the SW

### New horizons for the CRIU project
  - learnt about Checkpoint & Restore In Userspace project
    - it doesn't capture a single process only but whole graph (with kernel
      resources such as TCP connections)
    - newly providing API via `libsockcr`
  - application: live migration, seamless kernel updates (under containers)
  - interdependent on kernel (from user's POV, actual CRIU implementation must
    cooperate with/watch upstream)
  - ongoing challenges
    - binary logging (~qb-blackbox + not wasting time on printf)
    - advanced procfs support
      - it's slow to get info from kernel (workflow: binary -> text -> binary)
  - interesting project


### Container mechanics in Linux and rkt
  - rkt alternative to Docker to build upon namespaces API, part of CoreOS
    project
  - seems more lightweight (no client-server architecture)
  - then uncounted repetition of Linux namespaces theory

### Powering Twitter's infrastructure with containers
  - 10^5 containers (didn't understand whether for internal processing or in
    total)
  - **tocheck**: Aurora, Mesos
  - presented data that indicated drawbacks of hyperthreading (i.e. really not
    equal to two full CPUs) and necessity to take this into account when
    assigning tasks to CPUs


### Privacy and Tracking Protection in Firefox
  - corporate vs government surveillance
    - notify government everytime you have new friend, new job, write a letter,
      ...
    - the users did it voluntarily
    - privacyinternational.org
  - privacy as a business model
    - nice metaphor: suck up information dust
    - Google, Facebook etc. + unknown companies
    - over world it's tens billions dollar industry (much of it is Google)
  - methods
    - third party cookies
      - 67 % of top million sites use Google Analytics
    - browser fingerprinting (loaded 3rd party JS)
      - Lightbeam extension visualizing 3rd party links
  - solution
    - political
      - General Data Protection Regulation, succeeding law from 1995 (they
	realized OK button for cookie isn't actually working)
    - technical
      - limit network requests 
      - using similar infrastructure, list (GPL 3) collected by Disconnect
	company
        - and limiting 3rd party cookies in private mode
      - sites shouldn't have hard dependencies on 3rd party services
      - don't use Firefox, use Tor (browser)
  - curiosities from QA
    - referrer header (https -> https is passing(!))
    - **tocheck**: Cloudflare, SSL termination

## <a id="day2"/> Day 2

### etcd: the cornerstone of distributed systems using Go
  - etc *d*istributed key-value storage, higher order systems building block
  - v1 had consensus algorituhm with flaws, now it implemets Raft (**tocheck**
    paper: In Search of an Understandable Consensus Algorithm)
    - current version is 2.0, and 3.0 is coming
  - peers communicate using protobuf (**tocheck**)
  - why etcd: HA, HR (reliability), strong consistency guarantees
  - API provides interesting operations for atomicity (compare and swap/delete)
  - application/motivation (within CoreOS project)
    - locksmith: CoreOS reboot lock after updates
    - SkyDNS (DNS and service cofiguration, backed by etcd)
    - vulcand: load balancer for microservices (it's stateless thanks to etcd)
  - Go experience
    - pro: rapid development, good concurrency
    - drawbacks:
      - CloseNotify (leaking FDs), unpredictable GC (latency spikes), scheduler
	startvation (Raft goroutine)


### Building a peer-to-peer network for Real-Time Communication
  - aka Ring 
  - demo
    - first highlighted portability (installers for various systems)
    - then call to Canada with webcam to a room, and a Python script to turn
      on/off a lamp remotely
      - and then Android and Beaglebone device demo
    - little problem that the GUI was in French
      - Erreur de segmentation :-) (it's Alpha yet)
  - three levels of distribution: centralized, decentralized (multiple
    servers), distributed
  - based on OpenDHT - explanation
    - QA: entry points
      - well-known node operated by them (only for the first start)
      - later published list of entry nodes
  - problem of NATs/firewalls: STUN, TURN
    - every peer can register as one
  - DHT objects are the clients and mailboxes
    - they extended upstream OpenDHT to support LISTEN (on the mailbox) call
  - security
    - no servers, no subscriptions
    - users are identified by public keys
      - RSA handshake?, checking certificates
        - by default they are self-signed, or can be X.509
      - communication itself is enrypted with AES128
  - imlemented as a daemon + client application
    - client application can be crafted for another purpose

### Containers and virtualization
  - evolution of buzzwords: VM, cloud, container
  - **tocheck**: priviliged containers, vagrant, Atomic, JeOS
  - demo: 5 levels of nested virtualization
    - running a VM inside container (thus it's privileged)
    - inside that is container and in that another VM (vagrant?)
    - inside that another Docker with just busybox

### How containers work in Linux
  - brief summary of history and purposes
  - importance of shared kernel
    - updates, schedulling
  - fruit of 2011 agreement on virtualization/namespaces API
    - cgroups (controllers), namespaces
    - API is terrible (with exception of network ns (`ip netns`))
  - comparison with full virtual machines
    - their images are 10^2 MBs (cf. 10 MBs)
    - hypervisor doesn't see into the machine (scheduling)
    - complicated preemptiveness (keyword: (memory) ballooning)

### Key-signing party
  - didn't spot a fake passport, saved by [community][1]
  - subjective ID based statistics of FOSDEM audience: 6/14 Germans, 4/14
    French, 2/14 Belgian, 1/14 British, 1/14 others


[1]: https://lists.fosdem.org/pipermail/fosdem/2016-February/002445.html
