---
layout: post
title: Beijing autumn
tags: travel China Beijing
---

Despite various formal definitions of year seasons, I personally stick to
following events denoting season turnovers:

  * winter--spring: trees start growing leaves,
  * spring--summer: this one is fuzzy, no clear definition yet,
  * summer--fall: trees start having orange/yellow/red leaves,
  * fall-winter: first snow or day temperature below zero.

Similar to this year's [winter--spring]({% post_url 2016-04-21-nuremberg %})
transition, I had left Prague in late (already cold) summer and returned when
trees turned orange.
Thanks to my employer I was visiting my colleagues located in Beijing offices.

Spending most of my life in Europe, I experienced many novel things that are
worth recording in this post.

### Before travel

I had planned to run a 10 km race the day before my departure, however, I was so
stressed from the travel that I gave up due to symptoms of commencing cold.
The nervousness stemmed from: no cash (juans), no understanding of Chinese
language nor script (I knew just emergency phrases), unknown environment, no
control (I had to rely on pre-arranged taxi service) and probably travelling
alone that far.
However, after I arrived, I suddenly felt healthy (and just tired) -- this way
I learnt the travel fever is a real thing and there is no reason to worry about
that.


### Society

  * Very poor knowledge of English
    * I couldn't chat even about weather with a taxi assistant.
  * Despite I couldn't understand a word, I heard radio advertisement is same
    both in Europe and Asia.
    * Ear-drilling melodies, repetitions, creepy tone of voice
  * *hukou* similar to visa, however, for for cities.
    * You have to obtain that to be a full citizen of Beijing.
    * Business reasons/work for government/education (PhD.) helps.
  * Output/input corridors with arrows in metro.
  * Pointless security checks in metro (they cause queues).

### Food

  * I had forgotten to be scared of chopsticks before the travel. Thanks to
    that nothing prevented me from learning to use them quite quickly (despite
    my clumsy style).
  * Sharing food is common, you don't have your dish on your plate.
    * Somewhere assisted with rotating tables.
  * No explicit courses, you just randomly pick food to match your taste.
  * Sipping is OK, spoiling the tablecloth as well (they account for that).
  * Hot water is often served as the basic beverage.
  * I got used to spicy food (I may have a cough afterwards).
  * Meals:
    * hot pot
    * fried noodles
    * noodle soup
    * noodles in sauce with meat
    * dumplings (yeast, "ears")
    * shrimps
    * cabbage
    * Beijing duck
    * little soft desserts
    * fermented soya milk (similar to butter milk)
    * pumpkin soup

### Chinese style, people, culture

  * Long queues at customs (not used to that in Schengen area), alleviated when
    more people shift began.
  * Elevators are missing (not always) floors with digit 4 and also number 13.
  * Heavy use of smartphones (booking, maps, transport, payments) and many
    "[phone zombies][zomb]".
  * Women often walk in pairs holding each other.
  * No hipsters.
  * Tourist buses transporting people to the Olympic Park used highway as
    parking lot. (Two of four lanes were completely blocked and there was a
    bottleneck where buses were turning.)
  * Evening dancing lessons on playgrounds in hutongs (mostly for older women).
    * Tai chi is exercised in parks in the morning.
  * Chinese people are very good at queueing (hard to beat them).

[zomb]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smartphone_zombie

### Sites, environment

  * Beijing appears to be a modern city, well organized by system of rings (the
    first ring encompasses the Forbidden City, 7th ring is being built and it's
    a highway 150 km far away from the center).
  * *Hutongs* are traditional streets with flat houses and yards (*siheyuan*).
    * Now they're only inside the second ring, many were destroyed to make
      place for modern buildings.

### Work

  * My first impression was relative mess on the desktops, some people even had
    gym equipment besides their tables. (I got used to that in few days.)
  * Apart from that offices appeared similar to Europe.
  * Public toilets are often *squat toilets* and the western restrooms are
    missing a brush.

### Misc

  * I was afraid of publicly blowing my nose after readings on the internets.
    It turned out it's just normal.
  * Cars are like trams in Prague (they'd run over you if you don't watch out).
    * Especially watch out for bicycles and rikshaws who usually ride the
      places where people tend to wait for a green light.
    * Green light is not a guarantee of safe road crossing.
  * Individual car transport is fast thanks to street grid between 10 PM and
    6 AM (sic). Otherwise it's paralyzed by continuous rush hour.
    * 5 million cars, registration plates restrictions (based on last digit),
      you have to win an official lottery to be entitled for own plate.
  * I bought a bottled water in local supermarket. Despite the cap looked like
    it had a valve, it was just that shape, no valve inside.
  * Because of language barrier I had to use non-verbal communication more/more
    intensively, which was exhausting (forced smiles).


#### Jet lag

  * I flew 6 hours eastwards, it took me ~3 days until I could sleep at night
    and not be sleepy during 10 AM to 3 PM.

#### Smog

  * Smog is to various extent plague of Eastern parts of China.
    * You can smell it outdoors.
  * People are used to that, they just watch particulates reports and wear
    respiration masks (they are almost a fashion item).
    * 500 ppm (~0.5 g in cubic meter) is maximum range of official instruments.
    * My guess is that 1 in 30 people wear the mask. (They don't wear it not to
      be contagious.)
  * It limits visibility and sunlight.

#### Contrasts

  * Hotel limo vs Airport express, 20 times more expensive.
  * Narrow, crooked streets adjacent to the Central Banking District.
  

### Kanji characters I learnt

It is easier to learn reading Chinese than to speak/understand it.

meaning | character | sound
--- | --- | ---
one | 一 |
two | 二 |
three | 三 |
water | 水 |
juice | 汁 |
person | 人 |
crowd | 众 |
<del>boil</del> | <del>box three lines</del> |
self | 自 |
river | 川 |
exit (outside direction) | 出
into | 入 |
mouth | 口 |
north | 北 | bei
east  | 东 | dong
south | 南 | nan
capital city | 京 | jing
fire | 火 |
king  | 王 | wang
of (possessive suffix) | 的 | de
sky | 天 | tian
gate | 门 | men
big | 大 | do
small | 小 | xiao
tree | 木 | mú
forest | 林 | lín
cycle/time | 回 | hui
middle/center | 中 | zhong
thread/line | 线 |
city/market | 市 | shi
ultra/super/really | 超 | chao

