---
title: Teremin (play)
layout: post
tags: culture theater
---

**Spoiler alert: Following text contains topics and plot of the play Teremin.
Reading that can attenuate your theater experience.**

## Plot

Lev Sergejevič Teremin comes to the USA with apparent intent to concert with
his newly invented electric musical instrument teremin.
He is accompanied by his manager Goldstein (a German) who builds their public
image image by telling a story how Teremin impressed Lenin when
playing the electric instrument (remember GOELRO) in his office. Teremin had
concerted already in the Soviet Union prior coming to the USA.

What is revealed later is that he is also an agent (forced though) of Soviet
intelligence and they want him to "infiltrate" US industry by launching serial
production of teremins.

Teremin founds the electric orchestra to support his popularization efforts. He
is accompanied by his manager Goldstein, musical polyglot Schillinger and
Samuel Goldstein. Goldstein was originally hired as a private
eye on Teremin by one of his fans -- later he is full-hearted member of the
orchestra though.

They organize an unprecedented electric music concert at stadium for thousands
of visitors. Goldstein admits the most of the audience are members of unions or
supporters of the communist party.

Teremin has success and RCA company agrees to produce teremins at mass scale
and Teremin further exploits his inventor's skills with further little gadgets
(lie detector, altimeter).

(Un)surprisingly, the RCA's plans collide with the Black Tuesday and the
following Great Depression. Teremin's businesses are bankcrupt, he has debts
and his fame fades away. He is even not interesting for the Soviet intelligence
anymore, so they stop commanding him and on top of that they allow his Russian
wife to come to visit him in New York.

Seemingly, Teremin is not in love with her (and later he actually unilaterally
divorced her) and Teremin is revealing his real motivation.
The teremin was not a musical instrument, it was intended as an wireless alarm
for the Lenin's office and playing tones was just a side effect. 
Other members of the orchestra are somehow disappointed that they were part of
a scam/dishonest enthusiasm (that was most hurting to the musician
Schillinger).
The situation is getting more and more depressive and Teremin confesses to (his
closest friend) Goldstein that the teremin is can also work in reverse mode --
turning sound into electromagnetic waves for the purposes of eavesdropping.
The demo and consequent installation in the Lenin'đ office was devious plot of
the intelligence service --
that also explains why Teremin was entangled with the agents.

Despite seriousness of the motives, it seems that Teremin is doing all that
because he just enjoys "hacking" the electronic components and creating various
gadgets. He denies that he would do that because of wealth, fame, family
protection or women.

The story ends by Teremin leaving the United States and going back to Russia
and no one ever heard of him again.

## Characters

### Lev Sergejevič Teremin

Musician and electrical engineer. He's an artist and geek by soul.

### Goldstein

Teremin's manager, businessman with German accuracy, sly. Later closest friend
of Teremin.


### Levine

Originally a waitress, later hired by Teremin as an assistant.
She is a woman, a black and(!) physicist. And also a keen communist.
This character doesn't fit much into the realm of the play and it's there
rather for narrative purposes.

### Lucie

A fan of Teremin, later they are lovers and she funds him with money she has
from her husband who is probably a mafia member.

### Joseph Schillinger

Musical genius and (musical) revolutionary, he is enthusiastic about electric
music.
This character has a lecture about turning data into music (in this case stock
prices) and he envisions automated production of music.

### Samuel Hoffmann

Private eye, baseball player wannabe and poor musician, he's however happy to
be dragged into the whole electic music thing.

### Other characters
- Kateřina Teremin -- Teremin's wife
- russian agents
- servant -- a former colleague of Levine, he's kind of racist


## Topics
- money, economy (The Great Depression, [Goldman's child(?) memories][hin])
- communism
	- Is Teremin a communist?
- physics
	- Hertz waves, vacuum tube explanation (in very layman terms)
	- wave equation (just a random formula during Schillinger's lecture)
- Tool is just a tool, what depends is the application.
	- teremin = musical instrument, alarm, listening device
	- on the stage we can see on object used as a mirror, a window and a
	  blackboard
- god/atheism
	- Teremin is invited to catholic radio statio for an interview, he is
	  reluctant to mention god.
	- Later Teremin searches for consolation and prays with Goldberg.
- intelligence services, espionage
- motivation vs freedom
	- women, money, fame, what was on market
	- Teremin recalls his times in academia in Russia where they didn't
	  explore what they were interested in, however, the stuff that they
	  had equipment available for (and it was hard to obtain anyway).
- mystification
	- The story is based on the [real person][lev] and [stories][thing].
- Russion revolution, cleansings (natural death, heart sickness)
- famine
	- revolution eats its own children (backed by story of man and wife who
	  ate their children in despair)

[hin]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperinflation_in_the_Weimar_Republic
[lev]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%C3%A9on_Theremin
[thing]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Thing_%28listening_device%29

## Composition
- on air label
	- Stage decoration when Teremin is making an interview in radio.
	  However, later it indicates that teremin boxes are transimitting.
- applause to Soviet anthem
	- Play ends with Teremin in the Soviet union and Soviet anthem is
	  played. All audience was applauding to this (the actors actually).
- frame (white sheets)
	- Play begins and ends with everything covered under white sheets.
- triple topic *not sure what I meant with this note*
- classic tragedy composition
	- exposition
	- collision -- RCA contract
	- crisis -- The Great Depression
	- peripetia(?) -- wrecked Teremin
	- tragedy -- return to Russia
- looking at concert from behind
	- Impressive scene when the theater audiance is actually at backstage
	  and they are watching the electric orchestra playing concert for
	  thousands of people.
- educational cuts
	- physics explanation
	- personality explanation
	- meetings with KGB
- music
	- real teremin (they actually play it)
	- stock market music (pitch is correlated with stock price)
	- rhythmicon (typewriter)

