---
layout: post
title: Das Kapital
tags: book economy economics Marx
---

Reading period: Feb 2016--Dec 2016

Despite the time I spent with this book (often I felt it's preventing me from
reading a better book), I did not finish it (as per ebook reader estimator, I
spent net ~40 hours reading it, and ~3 hours on this report).

The report about this book consists of: summary of presented ideas, notes on
form and language and then semi-annotated excerpts from the English
publication. 

## Summary

### Three kinds of value 
  - use value
    - based on utility for individual holders
      - induced idea: be it price on market of availability and wants of an individual
  - the value
    - based on labour spent producing
    - he doesn't distinguish labour quality, so it's basically time
      - assumption of all people (labourers) being equal
      - and exchangibility of commodities
    - conserved during circulation
  - price
    - based exchange rates
    - relative to chosen commodity (e.g. gold)
      - generalized as money
    - imaginary price
      - object without value (conscience, hnonr)

### Labour
  - source of value
  - makes commodities commensurable (cf money)
  - labour power -- commodity whose use-value is creation of value
    - its value is given by food, shelter, reproduction, education etc. of the
      labourer
    - key idea: value(labour power) < value(produced by labour power)
  - various quality of it (discrepancy with definition of value)
  - attributed only to humans
    - i.e. machines don't create value (by definition)
      - is it the operator?
  - later he implies this feature also on soil

### Money
  - circulating money proportional to trading rate
  - sell and purchase separator
  - credit based money not analyzed
  - prerequisite for capital

### Capital
  - appears in form of money after a successful exchange (i.e. both parties
    profit) and when money is goal (i.e. not spending money but advancing them)
  - surplus-value
    - one of of labour power produces more value than is it's value
    - material + labour power = product
    - value(material) + value(labour power) < value(product)
    - rate of surplus-value = surplus-value / value(product)
  - money retrieved by selling surplus-value
  - not well argued desire of capitalist to always increase and hoard capital
    - It would make sense if Marx admitted inflation.

### Productiveness and efficiency
  - general change of value is equal to change of productivity
  - the more efficient production, the higher rate of surplus-value
    - until it is the competitive advantage
    - exploiting labour power (child labor)
    - also cooperation
    - importance of tools and machinery

### Miscellanea
  - referring to science
    - chemistry (materialism)
    - evolution principle
  - many concepts and phenomena still apply today
  - not well defined what commodity is
  - criticizing church (Anglicans)

## Form

  - frequent quotations
    - other economists: Stuart Mill, James Mill, Adam Smith, Locke
      - Political Economy
    - social reports
    - statistics
    - even bible
  - antisemitism
  - opposition: moneybags, bourgeois brain
  - no gender neutral pronouns, mostly male
    - one quotation treats capital as femininum 

## Contents

### Preface

> The English Established Church, e.g., will more readily pardon an attack on
> 38 of its 39 articles than on 1/39 of its income.

### Part 1: Commodities and Money

#### Chapter 1: Commodities

> Lastly nothing can have value, without being an object of utility. If the
> thing is useless, so is the labour contained in it; the labour does not count
> as labour, and therefore creates no value.

- Mixing value and use value explained previously.

> Use values cannot confront each other as commodities, unless the useful
> labour embodied in them is qualitatively different in each of them.

> with reference to use value, the labour contained in a commodity counts only
> qualitatively, with reference to value it counts only quantitatively,

> labour, exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal amounts
> of value. But it will yield, during equal periods of time, different
> quantities of values in use; more, if the productive power rise, fewer, if it
> fall.

> value can only manifest itself in the social relation of commodity to
> commodity.

> If the values of all commodities rose or fell simultaneously, and in the same
> proportion, their relative values would remain unaltered. Their real change
> of value would appear from the diminished or increased quantity of
> commodities produced in a given time.

- assumption of constant labour power

> The secret of the expression of value, namely, that all kinds of labour are
> equal and equivalent, because, and so far as they are human labour in
> general, cannot be deciphered, until the notion of human equality has already
> acquired the fixity of a popular prejudice.

> Weaving, which is the labour of certain private individuals producing a
> particular article, linen, acquires in consequence a social character, the
> character of equality with all other kinds of labour.

> Amongst the commodities which, in form B, figure as particular equivalents of
> the linen, and, in form C, express in common their relative values in linen,
> this foremost place has been attained by one in particular – namely, gold.

- This is obsolete now.

> labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the labour of society,
> only by means of the relations which the act of exchange establishes directly
> between the products, and indirectly, through them, between the producers.

- IOW, without exchange, labour couldn't be stripped of quality.

> the product must be not only useful, but useful for others,

> [Robinson Crusoe ...] commences, like a true-born Briton, to keep a set of
> books.

> The tithe to be rendered to the priest is more matter of fact than his
> blessing.

- Church despect.

> So far no chemist has ever discovered exchange value either in a pearl or a
> diamond.

- Exchange value is just virtual.

> All commodities are non-use-values for their owners, and use-values for their
> non-owners.

- That's why exchange is (literally) useful.

> [“These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the
> beast.” Revelations, 17:13; “And that no man might buy or sell, save he that
> had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.”
> Revelations, 13:17.] (Apocalypse.)

- Even biblical quote 

#### Chapter 2: Exchange

> In the last decades of the 17th century it had already been shown that money
> is a commodity,

#### Chapter 3: Money, Or the Circulation of Commodities

> It is not money that renders commodities commensurable. Just the contrary. It
> is because all commodities, as values, are realised human labour, and
> therefore commensurable,

- Importance of previous definition of "unified" labour.

> It is owing to this that, in all metallic currencies, the names given to the
> standards of money or of price were originally taken from the pre-existing
> names of the standards of weight.

- Interesting observation (pound, mark).

> Hence an object may have a price without having value. The price in that case
> is imaginary, like certain quantities in mathematics.

- Does he really mean imaginary numbers? Those are quite orthogonal to reals.

> the money in reality represents the quantity or sum of gold ideally expressed
> beforehand by the sum of the prices of the commodities.

- Gold standard superseded already.

> the quantity of money functioning as the circulating medium is equal to the
> sum of the prices of the commodities divided by the number of moves made by
> coins of the same denomination.

- More trading more money? This is inverse to the quoted relation.

> The erroneous opinion that it is, on the contrary, prices that are determined
> by the quantity of the circulating medium, and that the latter depends on the
> quantity of the precious metals in a country; this opinion was based by those
> who first held it, on the absurd hypothesis that commodities are without a
> price, and money without a value, when they first enter into circulation, and
> that, once in the circulation, an aliquot part of the medley of commodities
> is exchanged for an aliquot part of the heap of precious metals.

> It has its immediate origin in the metallic currency. Money based upon credit
> implies on the other hand conditions, which, from our standpoint of the
> simple circulation of commodities, are as yet totally unknown to us. But we
> may affirm this much, that just as true paper money takes its rise in the
> function of money as the circulating medium, so money based upon credit takes
> root spontaneously in the function of money as the means of payment.

> Commodities are thus sold not for the purpose of buying others, but in order
> to replace their commodity-form by their money-form.

> why Indian commodities are so cheap. Answer: Because the Hindus bury their money.

- He quotes Jacob Vanderlint.


> But money itself is a commodity, an external object, capable of becoming the
> private property of any individual. Thus social power becomes the private
> power of private persons. The ancients therefore denounced money as
> subversive of the economic and moral order of things.


### Part 2: Transformation of Money into Capital

#### Chapter 4: The General Formula for Capital

> If we abstract from the material substance of the circulation of commodities,
> that is, from the exchange of the various use-values, and consider only the
> economic forms produced by this process of circulation, we find its final
> result to be money: this final product of the circulation of commodities is
> the first form in which capital appears.

> different form: M-C-M, the transformation of money into commodities, and the
> change of commodities back again into money; or buying in order to sell.
> Money that circulates in the latter manner is thereby transformed into,
> becomes capital,

- Also compare money-power-money, power-money-power. I just think it's a phase
  shift.

> What, however, first and foremost distinguishes the circuit C-M-C from the
> circuit M-C-M, is the inverted order of succession of the two phases.

- What about the terminale phase of investing the money (M)/capital?

> The money, therefore, is not spent, it is merely advanced.

> The circuit C-M-C starts with one commodity, and finishes with another, which
> falls out of circulation and into consumption. Consumption, the satisfaction
> of wants, in one word, use-value, is its end and aim. The circuit M-C-M, on
> the contrary, commences with money and ends with money. Its leading motive,
> and the goal that attracts it, is therefore mere exchange-value.

- That's true but IMO they are just the same with dualism in place.

> As the conscious representative of this movement, the possessor of money
> becomes a capitalist. His person, or rather his pocket, is the point from
> which the money starts and to which it returns. The expansion of value, which
> is the objective basis or main-spring of the circulation M-C-M, becomes his
> subjective aim, and it is only in so far as the appropriation of ever more
> and more wealth in the abstract becomes the sole motive of his operations,
> that he functions as a capitalist, that is, as capital personified and
> endowed with consciousness and a will.

> The restless never-ending process of profit-making alone is what he aims at.

- I don't think this is clear from the previous argumentation.

> inwardly circumcised Jews,

#### Chapter 5: Contradictions in the General Formula of Capital

> “exchange is a transaction by which both sides gain.”

- Destutt de Tracy: “Traité de la Volonté et de ses effets.” Paris, 1826

> The value of a commodity is expressed in its price before it goes into
> circulation, and is therefore a precedent condition of circulation, not its
> result.

- That would be too rigid.

> The value of a thing consists solely in its relation to our wants.

- So let's condider use-value as market price where needs are the demand.

> “Commerce ... adds value to products, for the same products in the hands of
> consumers, are worth more than in the hands of producers,

- S. P. Newman: “Elements of Polit. Econ.” Andover and New York, 1835

> the upholders of the delusion that surplus-value has its origin in a nominal
> rise of prices or in the privilege which the seller has of selling too dear,
> must assume the existence of a class that only buys and does not sell, i.e.,
> only consumes and does not produce. The existence of such a class is
> inexplicable from the standpoint we have so far reached, viz., that of simple
> circulation.

- Simple circulation = conservation of value (the labour based)?

> The sum of the values in circulation can clearly not be augmented by any
> change in their distribution, any more than the quantity of the precious
> metals in a country by a Jew selling a Queen Anne’s farthing for a guinea.


> Turn and twist then as we may, the fact remains unaltered. If equivalents are
> exchanged, no surplus-value results, and if non-equivalents are exchanged,
> still no surplus-value.

- ???

#### Chapter 6: The Buying and Selling of Labour-Power


> Moneybags, must be so lucky as to find, within the sphere of circulation, in
> the market, a commodity, whose use-value possesses the peculiar property of
> being a source of value, whose actual consumption, therefore, is itself an
> embodiment of labour, and, consequently, a creation of value.

> The historical conditions of its existence are by no means given with the
> mere circulation of money and commodities. It can spring into life, only when
> the owner of the means of production and subsistence meets in the market with
> the free labourer selling his labour-power.

> In contradistinction therefore to the case of other commodities, there enters
> into the determination of the value of labour-power a historical and moral
> element.

> If his capacity for labour remains unsold, the labourer derives no benefit
> from it,
- Wait, the labourer can cretate use-values for themselves, can't they?

> Its [labour power] value, like that of every other commodity, is already
> fixed before it goes into circulation, since a definite quantity of social
> labour has been spent upon it;

- By that rationale all wages should be equal in the same cultural and social
  context


### Part 3: The Production of Absolute Surplus-Value

#### Chapter 7: The Labour-Process and the Process of Producing Surplus-Value

> expend it on something useful, on something capable of satisfying a want of
> some sort.

> Franklin therefore defines man as a tool-making animal.

> The distinction between principal substance and accessory vanishes in the
> true chemical industries, because there none of the raw material re-appears,
> in its original composition, in the substance of the product.
- The idea of analyse is so naive, it admittedly stops working for chemical
  industry already.


> A machine which does not serve the purposes of labour, is useless.

- What a strong statement without any introductory context (probably in terms
  capitalists use-value).

> The product, therefore, of individual consumption, is the consumer himself;
> the result of productive consumption, is a product distinct from the
> consumer.

> With the keen eye of an expert, he has selected the means of production and
> the kind of labour-power best adapted to his particular trade,

- The capitalist also spent his labour power

> Though the capitalist have a hobby, and use a gold instead of a steel spindle,


> But the sum of the values of the commodities that entered into the process
> amounts to 27 shillings. The value of the yarn is 30 shillings.
- how does he determine value of the yarn? shouldn't it be based on the labour
  expended + value of input commodities? I don't see the surplus value 

> labour-power whose production has cost more time and labour, and which
> therefore has a higher value, than unskilled or simple labour-power. This
> power being higher-value, its consumption is labour of a higher class, labour
> that creates in equal times proportionally higher values than unskilled
> labour does.
- So no average social labour that would determine value, labour-based value
  is ill-defined.


#### Chapter 8: Constant Capital and Variable Capital

> Therefore, the means of production can never add more value to the product
> than they themselves possess independently of the process in which they
> assist.

#### Chapter 9: The Rate of Surplus-Value

> But in truth, the rate of surplus-value is not equal to s/C or s/(c+v), but
> to s/v: thus it is not 90/500 but 90/90 or 100%, which is more than five
> times the apparent degree of exploitation.

> And the Professor calls this an “analysis!”
- Mocking a scholar (he is actually right on that point).

> Now, gentlemen, if you compare the working-time you pay for,
- calling persons

#### Chapter 10: The Working day

> You preach to me constantly the gospel of “saving” and “abstinence.” Good! I
> will, like a sensible saving owner, husband my sole wealth, labour-power, and
> abstain from all foolish waste of it. I will each day spend, set in motion,
> put into action only as much of it as is compatible with its normal duration,
> and healthy development. By an unlimited extension of the working day, you
> may in one day use up a quantity of labour-power greater than I can restore
> in three. What you gain in labour I lose in substance. The use of my
> labour-power and the spoliation of it are quite different things. If the
> average time that (doing a reasonable amount of work) an average labourer can
> live, is 30 years, the value of my labour-power, which you pay me from day to
> day is 1/(365×30) or 1/10950 of its total value. But if you consume it in 10
> years, you pay me daily 1/10950 instead of 1/3650 of its total value, i.e.,
> only 1/3 of its daily value, and you rob me, therefore, every day of 2/3 of
> the value of my commodity. You pay me for one day’s labour-power, whilst you
> use that of 3 days. That is against our contract and the law of exchanges. I
> demand, therefore, a working day of normal length, and I demand it without
> any appeal to your heart, for in money matters sentiment is out of place. You
> may be a model citizen, perhaps a member of the Society for the Prevention of
> Cruelty to Animals, and in the odour of sanctity to boot; but the thing that
> you represent face to face with me has no heart in its breast. That which
> seems to throb there is my own heart-beating. I demand the normal working day
> because I, like every other seller, demand the value of my commodity.
- manifesto of working unions ?


> in any given economic formation of society, where not the exchange-value but
> the use-value of the product predominates, surplus labour will be limited by
> a given set of wants which may be greater or less, and that here no boundless
> thirst for surplus labour arises from the nature of the production itself.

> This corvée soon developed into a servile relationship existing in point of
> fact, not in point of law, until Russia, the liberator of the world, made it
> legal under presence of abolishing serfdom.

> The ratio of the corvée to the necessary labour 56/84 or 66 2/3 % gives a
> much smaller rate of surplus-value than that which regulates the labour of
> the English agricultural or factory labourer.
- compares peasants in Wallachia with factory workrs

> The manufacture of lucifer matches dates from 1833, from the discovery of the
> method of applying phosphorus to the match itself.
- heart moving examples of child labor in terrible conditions 

> is commanded to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow, but they did not know
> that he had to eat daily in his bread a certain quantity of human
> perspiration mixed with the discharge of abscesses, cobwebs, dead
> black-beetles, and putrid German yeast, without counting alum, sand, and
> other agreeable mineral ingredients.

- Food industry cheating since ever.


> While they fail to do this, their mere existence causes a relative loss to
> the capitalist, for they represent during the time they lie fallow, a useless
> advance of capital.
- tools earn the most when they're used

> Labour is scarce here, and might fall short if there were such a regulation.”
> (i.e., Ellis Brown & Co. might fall into the fatal perplexity of being
> obliged to pay labour-power its full value.)
- joking tone


> If then the unnatural extension of the working day, that capital necessarily
> strives after in its unmeasured passion for self-expansion, shortens the
> length of life of the individual labourer, and therefore the duration of his
> labour-power, the forces used up have to be replaced at a more rapid rate and
> the sum of the expenses for the reproduction of labour-power will be greater;
- not easy to quantify this

> What experience shows to the capitalist generally is a constant excess of population,
- Applies to developing countries today

> principle of natural selection, that works so powerfully amongst them, and only permits the survival of the strongest, are
- adopting novel ideas

in Austria in 1860, for children between 14 and 16,
- not only England

> Soon after this the June insurrection in Paris and its bloody suppression
> united, in England as on the Continent, all fractions of the ruling classes,
> landlords and capitalists, stock-exchange wolves and shop-keepers,
> Protectionists and Freetraders, government and opposition, priests and
> freethinkers, young whores and old nuns, under the common cry for the
> salvation of Property, Religion, the Family and Society.
- enumeration of Marx enemies

> The Lynx eye of Capital discovered that the Act of 1844 did not allow 5
> hours’ work before mid-day without a pause of at least 30 minutes for
> refreshment,
- personification


> That part of capital then, which is represented by the means of production,
> by the raw material, auxiliary material and the instruments of labour does
> not, in the process of production, undergo any quantitative alteration of
> value. I therefore call it the constant part of capital, or, more shortly,
> *constant capital*. On the other hand, that part of capital, represented by
> labour-power, does, in the process of production, undergo an alteration of
> value. It both reproduces the equivalent of its own value, and also produces
> an excess, a surplus-value, which may itself vary, may be more or less
> according to circumstances. This part of capital is continually being
> transformed from a constant into a variable magnitude. I therefore call it
> the variable part of capital, or, shortly, *variable capital*.

#### Chapter 11: Rate and Mass of Surplus-Value

> The guilds of the middle ages therefore tried to prevent by force the
> transformation of the master of a trade into a capitalist, by limiting the
> number of labourers that could be employed by one master within a very small
> maximum.

> Furnaces and workshops that stand idle by night, and absorb no living labour,
> are “a mere loss” to the capitalist. Hence, furnaces and workshops constitute
> lawful claims upon

> bourgeois brain, inheriting the accumulated capitalistic qualities of  “four generations,”
- disrespectful personification


### Part 4: Production of Relative Surplus-Value

#### Chapter 12: The Concept of Relative Surplus-Value


> Despite the important part which this method plays in actual practice, we are
> excluded from considering it in this place, by our assumption, that all
> commodities, including labour-power, are bought and sold at their full value.
> Granted this, it follows that the labour-time necessary for the production of
> labour-power, or for the reproduction of its value, cannot be lessened by a
> fall in the labourer’s wages below the value of his labour-power, but only by
> a fall in this value itself. Given the length of the working day, the
> prolongation of the surplus labour must of necessity originate in the
> curtailment of the necessary labour-time; the latter cannot arise from the
> former. In the example we have taken, it is necessary that the value of
> labour-power should actually fall by one-tenth, in order that the necessary
> labour-time may be diminished by one-tenth, i.e., from ten hours to nine, and
> in order that the surplus labour may consequently be prolonged from two hours
> to three. Such a fall in the value of labour-power implies, however, that the
> same necessaries of life which were formerly produced in ten hours, can now
> be produced in nine hours. But this is impossible without an increase in the
> productiveness of labour.
- capitalism also leads to effectiveness 

> Whenever an individual capitalist cheapens shirts, for instance, by
> increasing the productiveness of labour he by no means necessarily aims at
> reducing the value of labour-power and shortening, pro tanto the necessary
> labour-time. But it is only in so far as he ultimately contributes to this
> result, that he assists in raising the general rate of surplus-value.

> The real value of a commodity is, however, not its individual value, but its
> social value; that is to say, the real value is not measured by the
> labour-time that the article in each individual case costs the producer, but
> by the labour-time socially required for its production.

> Relative surplus-value is, on the contrary, directly proportional to that
> productiveness. It rises with rising and falls with falling productiveness.
- should read *relative* productivness

> why does the capitalist, whose sole concern is the production of
> exchange-value, continually strive to depress the exchange-value of
> commodities
- He puts that into capitalists mind with no explanation.


#### Chapter 13: Co-operation

> These individual differences, or “errors” as they are called in mathematics,

> Thus the laws of the production of value are only fully realised for the
> individual producer, when he produces as a capitalist, and employs a number
> of workmen together, whose labour, by its collective nature, is at once
> stamped as average social labour.


> The effect is the same as if the means of production had cost less. The
> economy in their application is entirely owing to their being consumed in
> common by a large number of workmen.
- See [Refragmentation](http://www.paulgraham.com/re.html) and economy of scale.

> their assemblage in one place is a necessary condition of their co-operation.
- not true anymore

> The directing motive, the end and aim of capitalist production, is to extract
> the greatest possible amount of surplus-value, and consequently to exploit
> labour-power to the greatest possible extent.
- why? so that capital isn't sitting idle

> But, when considering the capitalist mode of production, he, on the contrary,
> treats the work of control made necessary by the co-operative character of
> the labour-process as identical with the different work of control,
> necessitated by the capitalist character of that process and the antagonism
> of interests between capitalist and labourer.
- managers are result and requirement of the scale! what is he getting at with
  these antagonists?

> He is at liberty to set the 100 men to work, without letting them co-operate.
> He pays them the value of 100 independent labour-powers, but he does not pay
> for the combined labour-power of the hundred.
- he has to pay the managers though


> Co-operation ever constitutes the fundamental form of the capitalist mode of
> production, nevertheless the elementary form of co-operation continues to
> subsist as a particular form of capitalist production side by side with the
> more developed forms of that mode of production.
- interesting I'd associate that rather with socialism


#### Chapter 14: Division of Labour and Manufacture


> On the one hand, therefore, manufacture either introduces division of labour
> into a process of production, or further develops that division; on the other
> hand, it unites together handicrafts that were formerly separate.

> Whether complex or simple, each operation has to be done by hand, retains the
> character of a handicraft, and is therefore dependent on the strength, skill,
> quickness, and sureness, of the individual workman in handling his tools.
- that must have been obsolete even at his times

> Castes and guilds arise from the action of the same natural law, that
> regulates the differentiation of plants and animals into species and
> varieties,
- Another reference to Darwin

> It is only the special skill accumulated from generation to generation, and
> transmitted from father to son, that gives to the Hindu, as it does to the
> spider, this proficiency.

> On the other hand, constant labour of one uniform kind disturbs the intensity
> and flow of a man’s animal spirits, which find recreation and delight in mere
> change of activity.

> Since the collective labourer has functions, both simple and complex, both
> high and low, his members, the individual labour-powers, require different
> degrees of training, and must therefore have different values. Manufacture,
> therefore, develops a hierarchy of labour-powers, to which there corresponds
> a scale of wages.

> Alongside of the hierarchic gradation there steps the simple separation of
> the labourers into skilled and unskilled. For the latter, the cost of
> apprenticeship vanishes; for the former, it diminishes, compared with that of
> artificers, in consequence of the functions being simplified. In both cases
> the value of labour-power falls.
- Does the value really fall? With greater expertise...

> A relatively thinly populated country, with well-developed means of
> communication, has a denser population than a more numerously populated
> country, with badly-developed means of communication;
- communication contracts distances 

> A merchant could buy every kind of commodity, but labour as a commodity he
> could not buy.

> Manufactures, accordingly, prosper most where the mind is least consulted,
> and where the workshop may ... be considered as an engine, the parts of which
> are men.”
- this is Marx quoting, he was not the only one who realized that



#### Chapter 15: Machinery and Modern Industry


> “It is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened
> the day’s toil of any human being.”
- When I create script to automate something I do it for others, not myself.

> In Germany, they tried at first to make one spinner work two spinning-wheels,
> that is, to work simultaneously with both hands and both feet. This was too
> difficult.

> Machinery, like every other component of constant capital, creates no new
> value, but yields up its own value to the product that it serves to beget.
- Why? Is it the definition of value by work time spent by man?

> it must be observed that the machinery, while always entering as a whole into
> the labour-process, enters into the value-begetting process only by bits.
- Your Note on Location 5885 | Added on Friday, February 26, 2016 9:23:02 AM

> value they transmit to the product
- OK. Labourer needs compensation to restore themselves, similarly the machine
  compensation is by definition  its wear and tear .

> machine’s capacity for work, that is, the number of its operating tools, or,
> where it is a question of force, their mass, the amount of its product will
> depend on the velocity of its working parts, on the speed, for instance, of
> the spindles, or on the number of blows given by the hammer in a minute.
- are there any machines where it doesn't hold?

> development is incomplete, but whose limbs are all the more supple. The
> labour of women and children was, therefore, the first thing sought for by
> capitalists
- Psychological manipulation?

> As was shown by an official medical inquiry in the year 1861, the high
> death-rates are, apart from local causes, principally due to the employment
> of the mothers away from their homes,
- social thinking already in that year , when we fought national games

> that the certificates of attendance at school were signed by the schoolmaster
> or schoolmistress with a cross, as they themselves were unable to write.

> greater exertion than he can sustain for a constancy.
- no gender neutral pronouns

> Even at the present day, when the system is perfectly organised and its
> labour lightened to the utmost, it is found nearly impossible to convert
> persons past the age of puberty, into useful factory hands.”
- Reading this while gym manager recruited two teen girls as receptionists. #present

> This invention confirms the great doctrine already propounded, that when
> capital enlists science into her service, the refractory hand of labour will
> always be taught docility.”
- this is bullshit


> That sooner or later, therefore, the capital and the workmen must come
> together again, and that, then, the compensation is complete. That the
> sufferings of the workmen displaced by machinery are therefore as transient
> as are the riches of this world.

> this takes place only by the intermediary of a new and additional capital
> that is seeking investment; not at all by the intermediary of the capital
> that formerly employed them and was afterwards converted into machinery.

> The number of the men condemned to work in coal and metal mines increased
> enormously owing to the progress of the English factory system; but during
> the last few decades this increase of number has been less rapid, owing to
> the use of new machinery in mining.

> Ireland, having during the last twenty years reduced its population by nearly
> one half, is at this moment undergoing the process of still further reducing
> the number of its inhabitants, so as exactly to suit the requirements of its
> landlords and of the English woollen manufacturers.

> All the persons employed in textile factories and in mines, taken together,
> number 1,208,442; those employed in textile factories and metal industries,
> taken together, number 1,039,605; in both cases less than the number of
> modern domestic slaves. What a splendid result of the capitalist exploitation
> of machinery!
- I don't get this irony.


> But we have already seen that, with every advance in the use of machinery,
> the constant component of capital, that part which consists of machinery, raw
> material, &c., increases, while the variable component, the part laid out in
> labour-power, decreases. 

> finds no hindrance except in the supply of raw material and in the disposal
> of the produce.

> By ruining handicraft production in other countries, machinery forcibly
> converts them into fields for the supply of its raw material. In this way
> East India was compelled to produce cotton, wool, hemp, jute, and indigo for
> Great Britain.

> The life of modern industry becomes a series of periods of moderate activity,
> prosperity, over-production, crisis and stagnation.
- Economic cycle!

> In the Coventry silk weaving industry the experiment of “cottage factories”
> was tried. In the centre of a square surrounded by rows of cottages, an
> engine-house was built and the engine connected by shafts with the looms in
> the cottages. In all cases the power was hired at so much per loom. The rent
> was payable weekly, whether the looms worked or not. Each cottage held from 2
> to 6 looms; some belonged to the weaver, some were bought on credit, some
> were hired.

> This modern so-called domestic industry has nothing, except the name, in
> common with the old-fashioned domestic industry, the existence of which
> pre-supposes independent urban handicrafts, independent peasant farming, and
> above all, a dwelling-house for the labourer and his family.
- compare with centrally planned economics

> These people are so exhausted after the day’s hard work, that neither the
> rules of health, of cleanliness, nor of decency are in the least observed.
- I also don't obey :-)


> prescribed by their half-starved mothers. These same mothers often make them
> work at home, after school
- What if it is not ripping off of the working class but just low performant
  economy that couldn't keep up with the population growth and urbanisation ?

> made the saving of time a necessity, and so forced into existence a dipping
> machine,
- I wonder if one could still earn fortune in a match factory. The general rule
  still holds that you have to sell to masses.

> Modern industry never looks upon and treats the existing form of a process as
> final. The technical basis of that industry is therefore revolutionary, while
> all earlier modes of production were essentially conservative.

> This same bourgeois is not ashamed to put this question: “Do you not think
> that the mine-owner also suffers loss from an explosion?”

> Moreover, all progress in capitalistic agriculture is a progress in the art,
> not only of robbing the labourer, but of robbing the soil;
- Didn't socialists do the same in Czechoslovakia? (No environmental concerns.)


### Part 5: Production of Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value

#### Chapter 16: Absolute and Relative Surplus-Value


> Relative surplus-value is absolute, since it compels the absolute
> prolongation of the working day beyond the labour-time necessary to the
> existence of the labourer himself. Absolute surplus-value is relative, since
> it makes necessary such a development of the productiveness of labour, as
> will allow of the necessary labour-time being confined to a portion of the
> working day.
- pointless observation

> It is not the tropics with their luxuriant vegetation, but the temperate
> zone, that is the mother-country of capital. It is not the mere fertility of
> the soil, but the differentiation of the soil, the variety of its natural
> products, the changes of the seasons, which form the physical basis for the
> social division of labour, and which, by changes in the natural surroundings,
> spur man on to the multiplication of his wants, his capabilities, his means
> and modes of labour.


#### Chapter 17: Changes of Magnitude in the Price of Labour-Power and in Surplus-Value

> It follows from this, that an increase in the productiveness of labour causes
> a fall in the value of labour-power and a consequent rise in surplus-value,
> while, on the other hand, a decrease in such productiveness causes a rise in
> the value of labour-power, and a fall in surplus-value.
- the assumption of constant daily labour price is quite strong here
- He somehow forgets about lessened value produced. That baloney.

> assume that it takes place under the conditions we have here supposed to
> exist; but in reality the very contrary is the case: a change in the
> productiveness and intensity of labour either precedes, or immediately
> follows, a shortening of the working day.
- At least he admits real applicability.

> Increased productiveness and greater intensity of labour,
- what is intensity? workforce?

> Only by suppressing the capitalist form of production could the length of the
> working day be reduced to the necessary labour time. But, even in that case,
> the latter would extend its limits. On the one hand, because the notion of
> “means of subsistence” would considerably expand, and the labourer would lay
> claim to an altogether different standard of life. On the other hand, because
> a part of what is now surplus labour, would then count as necessary labour; I
> mean the labour of forming a fund for reserve and accumulation.

> The capitalist mode of production, while on the one hand, enforcing economy
> in each individual business, on the other hand, begets, by its anarchical
> system of competition, the most outrageous squandering of labour-power and of
> the social means of production, not to mention the creation of a vast number
> of employments, at present indispensable, but in themselves superfluous.
- signs of centrally planed economy


#### Chapter 18: Various Formula for the rate of Surplus-Value

### Part 6: Wages

#### Chapter 19: The Transformation of the Value (and Respective Price) of Labour-Power into Wages

> It soon recognized that the change in the relations of demand and supply
> explained in regard to the price of labour, as of all other commodities,
> nothing except its changes i.e., the oscillations of the market-price above
> or below a certain mean. If demand and supply balance, the oscillation of
> prices ceases, all other conditions remaining the same.

> always accounts for his profit by simple cheating, by buying under, and selling over the value.
- negative sentiment

#### Chapter 20: Time-Wages

#### Chapter 21: Piece Wages

> [...] piece-wage allows the capitalist to make a contract for so much per
> piece with the head labourer [...] The exploitation of the labourer by
> capital is here effected through the
> exploitation of the labourer by the labourer.
- interesting, not only capitalists are evil

> Hence, e.g., in 1860 a great strike among the ribbon-weavers of Coventry.
- No relevant notes on first page of Google results in 2017.

> In the workshops under the Factory Acts, piece wages become the general rule,
> because capital can there only increase the efficacy of the working day by
> intensifying labour.

#### Chapter 22: National Differences of Wages


> In proportion as capitalist production is developed in a country, in the same
> proportion do the national intensity and productivity of labour there rise
> above the international level [...] The relative value of money will,
> therefore, be less in the nation with more developed capitalist mode of
> production than in the nation with less developed.
- inflation?

> The managers are, of course, English, as the native Russian capitalist is of
> no use in factory business.

> Russian manufacture manages to vegetate only by prohibition of foreign
> competition.

> The whole of our analysis of the production of surplus-value shows the
> absurdity of this conclusion, even if Carey himself had proved his premises
> instead of, after his usual uncritical and superficial fashion, shuffling to
> and fro a confused mass of statistical materials.

### Part 7: The Accumulation of Capital


> The capitalist who produces surplus-value – i.e., who extracts unpaid labour
> directly from the labourers, and fixes it in commodities, is, indeed, the
> first appropriator, but by no means the ultimate owner, of this
> surplus-value. He has to share it with capitalists, with landowners, &c., who
> fulfil other functions in the complex of social production. Surplus-value,
> therefore, splits up into various parts. Its fragments fall to various
> categories of persons, and take various forms, independent the one of the
> other, such as profit, interest, merchants’ profit, rent, &c.

#### Chapter 23: Simple Reproduction


> The bourgeois economist whose narrow mind is unable to separate the form of
> appearance from the thing that appears,

> The maintenance and reproduction of the working class is, and must ever be, a
> necessary condition to the reproduction of capital. But the capitalist may
> safely leave its fulfilment to the labourer’s instincts of self-preservation
> and of propagation.

#### Chapter 24: Conversion of Surplus-Value into Capital


> that the capital which is exchanged for labour-power is itself but a portion
> of the product of others’ labour appropriated without an equivalent;

> One party to the contract sells his
- no gender neutral pronoun


> If, therefore, the magnitude of value advanced in wages is not merely found
> again in the product, but is found there augmented by a surplus-value, this
> is not because the seller has been defrauded, for he has really received the
> value of his commodity; it is due solely to the fact that this commodity has
> been used up by the buyer.

> The fact that on this occasion the funds are derived from the unpaid labour
> of his workers makes absolutely no difference.
- inconsistent with previous note

> For instance, suppose a cloth manufacturer converts £2,000 into capital. One
> portion he lays out in buying weavers, the other in woollen yarn, machinery,
> &c. But the people, from whom he buys the yarn and the machinery, pay for
> labour with a part of the purchase money, and so on until the whole £2,000
> are spent in the payment of wages, i.e., until the entire product represented
> by the £2,000 has been consumed by productive labourers. It is evident that
> the whole gist of this argument lies in the words “and so on,” which send us
> from pillar to post.
- this represents Smith's error

> In the third part of Book II. I shall give the analysis of the real bearings
> of the facts.
- Pretty scheduled opus.

> For the rest, it is a matter of course, that Political Economy, acting in the
> interests of the capitalist class, has not failed to exploit the doctrine of
> Adam Smith, viz., that the whole of that part of the surplus-product which is
> converted into capital, is consumed by the working class.

> Fanatically bent on making value expand itself, he ruthlessly forces the
> human race to produce for production’s sake; he thus forces the development
> of the productive powers of society, and creates those material conditions,
> which alone can form the real basis of a higher form of society, a society in
> which the full and free development of every individual forms the ruling
> principle.

> It compels him to keep constantly extending his capital, in order to preserve
> it,

> His “Essays” are a cookery book with receipts of all kinds for replacing by
> some succedaneum the ordinary dear food of the labourer. The following is a
> particularly successful receipt of this
- Sometimes too preoccupied with food and diet of labourers .

> two primary creators of wealth, labour-power and the land,

> But this prejudice was first established as a dogma by the arch-Philistine,
> Jeremy Bentham, that insipid, pedantic, leather-tongued oracle of the
> ordinary bourgeois intelligence of the 19th century.
- What a language about [Jeremy
  Bentham](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeremy_Bentham), the founder of
  utilitarianism.

#### Chapter 25: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation


> Accumulation of capital is, therefore, increase of the proletariat.

> centres of modern industry – factories, manufactures, ironworks, mines, &c.

> When this term is once reached, only a very small number continue to find
> employment in the same branches of industry, whilst the majority are
> regularly discharged. This majority forms an element of the floating surplus
> population,

> As soon as capitalist production takes possession of agriculture, and in
> proportion to the extent to which it does so, the demand for an agricultural
> labouring population falls absolutely,



*this is where I quitted, 57% in the book*


### Part 8: Primitive Accumulation

  * Chapter 26: The Secret of Primitive Accumulation
  * Chapter 27: Expropriation of the Agricultural Population From the Land
  * Chapter 28: Bloody Legislation Against the Expropriated, from the End of the 15th Century. Forcing Down of Wages by Acts of Parliament
  * Chapter 29: Genesis of the Capitalist Farmer
  * Chapter 30: Reaction of the Agricultural Revolution on Industry. Creation of the Home-Market for Industrial Capital
  * Chapter 31: The Genesis of the Industrial Capitalist
  * Chapter 32: Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation
  * Chapter 33: The Modern Theory of Colonisation

