---
layout: post
title: The Picture of Dorian Gray (book)
tags: book England society art personality incomplete
---

Reading period: Jul--Sep 2018.

This entry is published in incomplete state.

## Plot

Missing.


## Topics


* random quotable wisdoms (mostly uttered by Dorian Gray):

> "There is no such thing as a moral or an immoral book. Books are well
> written, or badly written."
 
> "there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about, and
> that is not being talked about."

*  with some it's not clear whether they are genuine or passed along

> "Nowadays people know the price of everything and the value of nothing."

* on social graph building

> "I choose my friends for their good looks, my acquaintances for their good
> characters, and my enemies for their good intellects."

* information over matter
  * visionary or social constants?

> "The thoroughly well-informed man--that is the modern ideal."

> "can stand brute force, but brute reason is quite unbearable."

* matter over intellect

> Mysticism, with its marvellous power of making common things strange to us,
> and the subtle antinomianism that always seems to accompany it, moved him for
> a season; and for a season he inclined to the materialistic doctrines of the
> Darwinismus movement in Germany, and found a curious pleasure in tracing the
> thoughts and passions of men to some pearly cell in the brain, or some white
> nerve in the body, delighting in the conception of the absolute dependence of
> the spirit on certain physical conditions, morbid or healthy, normal or
> diseased.

* misogyny/trolling?

> "[...]no woman is a genius. Women are a decorative sex. They never have
> anything to say, but they say it charmingly. Women represent the triumph of
> matter over mind, just as men represent the triumph of mind over morals."

* also (has any women read the book?)

> Women, as some witty Frenchman once put it, inspire us with the desire to do
> masterpieces and always prevent us from carrying them out.

> the only way a woman can ever reform a man is by boring him so completely
> that he loses all possible interest in life.

> We have emancipated them, but they remain slaves looking for their masters,
> all the same. They love being dominated.

* evolution of human relationships

> "When one is in love, one always begins by deceiving one's self, and one
> always ends by deceiving others."

> Children begin by loving their parents; as they grow older they judge them;
> sometimes they forgive them.

> When a woman marries again, it is because she detested her first husband.
> When a man marries again, it is because he adored his first wife. Women try
> their luck; men risk theirs."

> She is very clever, too clever for a woman. [on Lady Monmouth]

* perceiving relationships and self

> When we blame ourselves, we feel that no one else has a right to blame us. It
> is the confession, not the priest, that gives us absolution. When Dorian had
> finished the letter, he felt that he had been forgiven.

> A man who is master of himself can end a sorrow as easily as he can invent a
> pleasure. I don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions. I want to use them,
> to enjoy them, and to dominate them.

* I like this

> To become the spectator of one's own life, as Harry says, is to escape the
> suffering of life.

* "work-life" balance

> "Good artists exist simply in what they make, and consequently are perfectly
> uninteresting in what they are. A great poet, a really great poet, is the
> most unpoetical of all creatures."

* too much weight on looks

> Besides, he has the appearance of being rich, and

> I trust he is one of the aristocracy. He has all the appearance of it, I must
> say. It might be a most brilliant marriage for Sibyl.

* from Lord Henry

> I admit that I think that it is better to be beautiful than to be good. But
> on the other hand, no one is more ready than I am to acknowledge that it is
> better to be good than to be ugly."

```
       good
     \22|22/1
      \2|2/11
       \|/111
ugly -------- beautiful
        |\111
        | \11
       bad

```

> All crime is vulgar, just as all vulgarity is crime. It is not in you,
> Dorian, to commit a murder.

* the miraculous painting
  * the first encounter

> the dim arrested light that struggled through the cream-coloured silk blinds,
> the face appeared to him to be a little changed. The expression looked
> different. One would have said that there was a touch of cruelty in the
> mouth. It was certainly strange.

> It had made him conscious how unjust, how cruel, he had been to Sibyl Vane.

> There were opiates for remorse, drugs that could lull the moral sense to
> sleep. But here was a visible symbol of the degradation of sin. Here was an
> ever-present sign of the ruin men brought upon their souls.

> He hated to be separated from the picture that was such a part of his life,

> He felt a terrible joy at the thought that some one else was to share his
> secret, and that the man who had painted the portrait that was the origin of
> all his shame was to be burdened for the rest of his life with the hideous
> memory of what he had done.

> "You told me you had destroyed it." "I was wrong. It has destroyed me."

* epistemology

> What was the use of knowing? If the thing was true, it was terrible. If it
> was not true, why trouble about it?

> I wish I knew," she said at last. He shook his head. "Knowledge would be
> fatal. It is the uncertainty that charms one. A mist makes things wonderful."

* on catholics

> [...] stirred him as much by its superb rejection of the evidence of the
> senses as by the primitive simplicity of its elements and the eternal pathos
> of the human tragedy that it sought to symbolize.

* contrast with today

> Society--civilized society, at least-- is never very ready to believe
> anything to the detriment of those who are both rich and fascinating.

* on countryside

> They get up early, because they have so much to do, and go to bed early,
> because they have so little to think about.

> anybody can be good in the country. There are no temptations there. That is
> the reason why people who live out of town are so absolutely uncivilized.

* when does it take place -- in London and in the nineteenth century

* [if it was today the painting price would raise](https://www.artsy.net/news/artsy-editorial-artwork-banksy-shredded-selling-13-million-sothebys)

## Characters

### Dorian Gray
* 19th century free-thinker lifestyle (cf Eugen Oniegin)

> "what brings you out so early? I thought you dandies never got up till two,
> and were not visible till five."

> "Half-past six! What an hour! It will be like having a meat-tea, or reading
> an English novel. It must be seven. No gentleman dines before seven.

> Harry spends his days in saying what is incredible and his evenings in doing
> what is improbable.

* processing mail (cf spam)

> The others he opened listlessly. They contained the usual collection of
> cards, invitations to dinner, tickets for private views, programmes of
> charity concerts, and the like that are showered on fashionable young men
> every morning during the season.

* and 38 starts at 17 yo, continues at 25 and 38

> I shall be of age in less than a year, and then I can do what I like.

* psychopath

> Dorian looked at Campbell. "How long will your experiment take, Alan?" he
> said in a calm indifferent voice. The presence of a third person in the room
> seemed to give him extraordinary courage.

* exploits his young-looking face to get away with Sibyl's suicide

### Basil Hallward
* painter
* killed by DG

### Lord Herry Henry

> "It was clear to him that the experimental method was the only method by
> which one could arrive at any scientific analysis of the passions; and
> certainly Dorian Gray was a subject made to his hand, and seemed to promise
> rich and fruitful results."

> The real drawback to marriage is that it makes one unselfish. And unselfish
> people are colourless. They lack individuality.
* pair selfishness, greed for children

* many quotes come from him, it's even reflected in the book

> "[...]forget you and all your wrong, fascinating, poisonous, delightful theories."
> "And those are ... ?" asked Lord Henry, helping himself to some salad. "Oh,
> your theories about life, your theories about love, your theories about
> pleasure. All your theories, in fact, Harry."

* Dorian respects him

### Lady Agatha

### Sibyl Vane
  * actress
  * naïve (16 yo)

> "what does money matter? Love is more than money."

### James Vane (brother)
  * accidentally shot

### Alan Campbell
* chemist, solves problems

> His dominant intellectual passion was for science.

* dissolves the corpse in nitric acid
* blackmailed
* commits suicide eventually

### Adrian Singleton
* ???

## Language & style

* Basil/Dorian: a chapter written as a dialogue
* Chapter 4: part of chapter is more descriptive and contemplating
* chapters are sharp delimiters (timeline jumps)
* in later parts, the inter-chapter gaps get shorter
* French excerpts I did not understand

* **some** for singular? "as if awakened from some dream."
* indirect enumeration, requiring cultural knowledge

> "One evening she is Rosalind, and the next evening she is Imogen. I have seen
> her die in the gloom of an Italian tomb, sucking the poison from her lover's
> lips. I have watched her wandering through the forest of Arden, disguised as
> a pretty boy in hose and doublet and dainty cap. She has been mad, and has
> come into the presence of a guilty king, and given him rue to wear and bitter
> herbs to taste of. She has been innocent, and the black hands of jealousy
> have crushed her reedlike throat. I have seen her in every age and in every
> costume.
* another cultural ref
> Besides, how do you know that Hetty isn't floating at the present moment in
> some starlit mill-pond, with lovely water-lilies round her, like Ophelia?"



> I am off to Paris by the midnight train, and I particularly wanted to see you before I left.

