---
layout: post
title: Active noise cancelling
tags: acoustics music physics
---

<script src="https://unpkg.com/d3@3/d3.min.js"></script>
<script src="https://unpkg.com/function-plot@1/dist/function-plot.js"></script>

Let's start with a simple one-dimensional (or also a plane wave) harmonic wave
that has source at origin of coordinates.
This is described as
\\[
	w(x,t) = a \sin \left(\omega \left(t - \frac{x}{c}\right)\right)
\\]
where $\omega = 2\pi f$, $a$ is wave amplitude and $c$ is the speed of sound.

The noise cancelling synthesizes a counter-wave and emits it at distance
$\Delta x$ from the microphone and with delay $\Delta t$, hence
\\[
	\newcommand\canc[1]{\overline{#1}}
	\begin{align}
	\canc w(x,t) &= a \sin \left(\omega \left((t-\Delta t) - \frac{x-\Delta x}{c}\right) + \varphi\right)\\\
	             &= a \sin \left(\omega \left(t - \frac{x}{c}\right) - 
		                     \omega \left(\Delta t - \frac{\Delta x}{c}\right) + \varphi\right)
	\end{align}
\\]
and we introduced parameter $\varphi$ representing phase shift of the
cancelling signal while assuming the amplitude is exactly matched.

Now, we are interested in the resulting superposition of the waves, we use the
goniometric equality
\\[
	\sin A + \sin B = 2 \sin \frac{A+B}{2} \cos \frac{A-B}{2}
\\]
to express the compound wave
\\[
\begin{multline}
	w(x,t) + \canc w(x, t) =
	2a \sin \left(\omega \left(t - \frac{x}{c}\right) -
	              \frac{\omega}{2} \left(\Delta t - \frac{\Delta x}{c}\right) - \frac{\varphi}{2}
		\right)\\\
	   \cos \left(
	              \frac{\omega}{2} \left(\Delta t - \frac{\Delta x}{c}\right) - \frac{\varphi}{2}
	        \right)
\end{multline}
\\]

We can see that the sine factor is the original wave just phase shifted[^pshift] and the
cosine factor represents amplitude of the composed wave.

[^pshift]: Different frequency will have different phase shifts, which
           [may be audible](http://www.silcom.com/~aludwig/Phase_audibility.htm).

Ideally, we'd like to have $\Delta t = \Delta x / c$ to eliminate both the
phase shift and achieve perfect destructive interference ($\varphi = \pi$).

Speed of sound is some 340 m/s and estimate $\Delta x ~ \approx 3.4\,\t{cm}$ so
the $\Delta t = 100\,\mu\t{s}$.
During this time the ANC system must AD convert input signal, apply phase shift
($\varphi = \pi$ is simple sign reverse) and DA on output. The period
corresponds to 10 kHz sampling and since there are devices commonly able of 44
kHz processing, this task should be doable digitally within the real time
contraint.


The plot[^x] below illustrates cancellation effect when delay is off by 1 μs
(1% error), 10 μs or 100 μs (i.e. no delay).

<div id="plot-1" style="width:100%"></div>
<script>
functionPlot({
  target: '#plot-1',
  data: [
    { fn: '20*log(2*abs(sin(PI*x*1e-6)))/log(10)', title: '1μs'},
    { fn: '20*log(2*abs(sin(PI*x*10e-6)))/log(10)', title: '10μs'},
    { fn: '20*log(2*abs(sin(PI*x*100e-6)))/log(10)', title: '100μs'},
  ],
  xAxis: {
    label: 'frequency [Hz]',
    domain: [20, 20000],
    type: 'log',
  },
  yAxis: {
    label: 'Intensity cancellation [dB]',
    domain: [-80, 8],
  },
  grid: true,
})
</script>

Note that the 100 μs cancellation causes constructive interference around 5 kHz.

## Conclusion

Noise from distant source can be considered a plane wave (our model), the
cancelling speaker doesn't produce a plane wave of matching amplitude (over
whole spectrum).
The real world is not 1D, so full [cancellation happens only in some
areas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Interferences_plane_waves.jpg), also
depending on the relative direction of the source.

The 1D model estimates the best achievable cancellation under ideal conditions.

## Extra: review of Sony WH-1000XM3

  * what is silence
    * hearing own body (breath, heart)
    * head tremor
    * tinnitus
  * active noise cancelling
    * surprisingly good for low frequencies (engines, moving vehicles)
    * worse for speech
    * it adds some (hiss) noise (microphones, amplifiers)
  * passive filtering is also quite good
  * Bluetooth
    * idling may cause audible latency (codec dependent?)
    * cannot use mobile app when jack is plugged in

[^x]: Credits to [funtion plot library](https://mauriciopoppe.github.io/function-plot/)

