---
layout: post
title: Prezident Blaník (movie)
tags: culture movie
---

**Warning: Stop reading if you haven't seen the movie yet! Really, you should
not read this before if you want to enjoy all the details of the movie!**

## Plot

Antonín Blaník runs for presidency. Initially, he is not very successful in his
campaign but he starts with simple phrases and populist claims and collects
sufficient number of signatures to apply for the elections.  Unfortunately, his
assistant is hijacked by unknown agents when he is about to deliver the
documents. Then we are presented with the real reason behind his candidature.
As a president he could make a gargantuan deal with Chinese -- selling them the
Czech state and keeping all the money. Because he cannot be the president
himself he forces other candidates to sign a contract ensuring the Chinese
deal. The only exception is the incumbent president who is not supposed to win
the elections. Turnover comes when a ghost of Václav Havel persuades Blaník not
to sell the Czech Republic -- so Blaník has to support the current president
Miloš Zeman. Later Blaník realizes that the state property is already sold --
to Russians (by his fellow lobbyist Libor), he decides to save the Czech crown
jewellery and escape from the Czech Republic. In the final scene, his
patriotism overweights and he decides to stay.

## Characters

### Antonín Blaník

  * mastermind, lobbyist
  * conflict of greediness (financial interest) and patriotism (it looks a bit
    artificial)

### Luboš "Žížala" Havránek

  * he does all the hard work
  * he defects and collaborates with Prague café

### Lenka "Lenka" Knytlová/Bartošová

  * she produces little useful ideas and keeps the "team" together
  * she needs to take care of her son

### Libor

  * another lobbyist, we never see him

### President candidates

  * real characters that were cleverly integrated into the plot

### Czech president

  * similar role to president candidates

### Prague café

  * a [strawman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Straw_man) created by Miloš Zeman's public speaker
    * represents the opposition to Miloš Zeman, often depicted as Prague artists
  * they behave like a sect praising Václav Havel
  * initially they oppose Blaník, later they somehow disappear

### Václav Havel

  * a ghost that warns Blaník about his intentions
  * idol of Prague café

### Chinese businessmen

### Real deputies (MPs)

### Blaník mother

## Topics


  * satire
    * reenactments of scenes and deeds of Miloš Zeman
    * playing jokes on (real) presidential candidates
    * parodying the campaign
  * Czech patriotism
    * Czech flags (actually abolished road advertisements), crown jewellery,
      Prague sights
  * comedy
  * fashion 
    * nurturing a pair of iguanas in order to make a pair of shoes from them
  * Russia/China as buyers of Czech state property
    * funnily enough the movie itself presents product placement of large Chinese
      cellphone manufacturer
  * Lumpenkavárna (Prague café)
    * despite Blaník rejects its existence it is shown to exist in the movie
    * thus the movie itself strengthens the idea that it attempts to deny
  * readiness
    * it reflects actual results of the elections (the movie premiered ~month
      after those events)
  * real politicians playing themselves
    * they have free(?) PR
    * make the movie authentic

## Comment

The plot is not complex it is a rather a sequence of several independent
subplots that are bound together by the presidential elections. The movie is
critical of Miloš Zeman and (ironically) attempts to conceive the message of
Czech pride and patriotism (sadly, shrewdness and intricacies of Tonda Blaník
(which made the character popular) are subjugated to this).
